The Grapes of Wrath Chapter One TO THE red country and part of the gray country of Oklahoma, the last rains came gently, and they did not cut the scarred earth. The plows crossed and  recrosscd the rivulet marks. The last rains lifted the corn  quickly and scattered weed colonies and grass along the sides  of the roads so that the gray country and the dark red coun-  try began to disappear under a green cover. In the last part  of May the sky grew pale and the clouds that had hung in  high puffs for so long in the spring were dissipated. The sun  flared down on the growing corn day after day until a line  of brown spread along the edge of each green bayonet. The  clouds appeared, and went away, and in a while they did not  try any more. The weeds grew darker green to protect them-  selves, and they did not spread any more. The surface of the  earth crusted, a thin hard crust, and as the sky became pale,  so the earth became pale, pink in the red country and white  in the gray country.  In the water-cut gullies the earth dusted down in dry lit-  tle streams. Gophers and ant lions started small avalanches.  And as the sharp ^un struck day after day, the leaves of the  young corn hjcame less stiff and erect; they bent in a curve  at first, and then, as the central ribs of strength grew weak,  each leaf tilted downward. Then it was June, and the sun  shone, more fiercely. The brown lines on the corn leaves  wid ed and moved in on the central ribs. The weeds frayed  3  4 The Grapes of Wrath  
and edged back toward their roots. The air was thin and the  sky more pale; and every day the earth paled.  In the roads where the teams moved, where the wheels  milled the ground and the hooves of the horses beat the  ground, the dirt crust broke and the dust formed. Every  moving thing lifted the dust into the air: a walking man  lifted a thin layer as high as his waist, and a wagon lifted the  dust as high as the fence tops, and an automobile boiled a  cloud behind it. The dust was long in settling back again.  When June was half gone, the big clouds moved up out  of Texas and the Gulf, high heavy clouds, rain-heads. The  men in the fields looked up at the clouds and sniffed at them  and held wet fingers up to sense the wind. And the horses  were nervous while the clouds were up. The rain-heads  dropped a little spattering and hurried on to some other  country. Behind them the sky was pale again and the sun  flared. In the dust there were drop craters where the rain  had fallen, and there were clean splashes on the corn, and  that was all.  A gentle wind followed the rain clouds, driving them on  northward, a wind that softly clashed the drying corn. A  day went by and the wind increased, steady, unbroken by  gusts. The dust from the roads fluffed up and spread out and  fell on the weeds beside the fields, and fell into the fields a  little way. Now the wind grew strong and hard and it  worked at the rain crust in the corn fields. Little by little the  sky was darkened by the mixing dust, and the wind felt over  the earth, loosened the dust, and carried it aw#y. The wind  grew stronger. The rain crust broke and the dust lifted up  out of the fields and drove gray plumes into the air like slug-  gish smoke. The corn threshed the wind and made a^ dry,  The Grapes of Wrath 5  rushing sound. The finest dust did not settle back to earth  now, but disappeared into the darkening sky.  The wind grew stronger, whisked under stones, carried up  straws and old leaves, and even little clods, marking its  course as it sailed across the fields. The air and the sky dark-  ened and through them the sun shone redly, and there was a  raw sting in the air. During a night the wind raced faster  over the land, dug cunningly among the rootlets of the corn,  
The Grapes of Wrath 617  "Lay down, Rosasharn," Ma said. "Lay down an' res'. I'll  try to figger some way to dry you off."  Winfield said, "Ma!" and the rain roaring on the roof  drowned his voice. "Ma!"  "What is it? What you want?"  "Look! In the corner."  Ma looked. There were two figures in the gloom; a man  who lay on his back, and a boy sitting beside him, his eyes  wide, staring at the newcomers. As she looked, the boy got  slowly up to his feet and came toward her. His voice  croaked. "You own this here?"  "No," Ma said. "Jus* come in outa the wet. We got a sick  girl. You got a dry blanket we could use an' get her wet  clothes off?"  The boy went back to the corner and brought a dirtycomfort and held it out to Ma.  "Thank ya," she said. "What's the matter'th that fella?"  The boy spoke in a croaking monotone. "Fust he was sick  but now he's starvin'."  "What?"  "Starvin'. Got sick in the cotton. He ain't et for six days."  Ma walked to the corner and looked down at the man. He  was about fifty, his whiskery face gaunt, and his open eyes  were vague and staring. The boy stood beside her. "Your  pa?" Ma asked.  "Yeah! Says he wasn' hungry, or he jus' et. Give me the  food. Now he's too weak. Can't hardly move."  The pounding of the rain decreased to a soothing swish on  the roof. The gaunt man moved his lips. Ma knelt beside him  and put her ear close. His lips moved again.  "Sure," Ma said. "You jus' be easy. He'll be awright. You  jus' wait'll I get them wet clo'es off'n my girl." 
618 The Grapes of Wrath  Ma went back to the girl. "Now slip 'em off," she said. She  held the comfort up to screen her from view. And when  she was naked, Ma folded the comfort about her.  The boy was at her side again explaining, "I didn' know.  He said he et, or he wasn' hungry. Las' night I went an' bust  a winda an' stoled some bread. Made 'im chew 'er down. But  he puked it all up, an' then he was weaker. Got to have soup  or milk. You folks got money to git milk?"  Ma said, "Hush. Don' worry. We'll figger somepin out."  Suddenly the boy cried, "He's dyin', I tell you! He's  starvin' to death, I tell you."  "Hush," said Ma. She looked at Pa and Uncle John stand-  ing helplessly gazing at the sick man. She looked at Rose of  Sharon huddled in the comfort. Ma's eyes passed Rose of  Sharon's eyes, and then came back to them. And the two  women looked deep into each other. The girl's breath came  short and gasping.  She said "Yes."  Ma smiled. "I knowed you would. I knowed!" She looked  down at her hands, tight-locked in her lap.  Rose of Sharon whispered, "Will will you all go out?"  The rain whisked lightly on the roof.  Ma leaned forward and with her palm she brushed thetousled hair back from her daughter's forehead, and she  kissed her on the forehead. Ma got up quickly. "Corne on,  you fellas," she called. "You come out in the tool shed."  Ruthie opened her mouth to speak. "Hush," Ma said. "Hush and git." She herded them through the door, drew  the boy with her; and she closed the squeaking door.  For a minute Rose of Sharon sat still in the whispering  barn. Then she hoisted her tired body up and drew the com-  fort about her. She moved slowly to the corner and stood  The Grapes of Wrath 619  
looking down at the wasted face, into the wide, frightened  eyes. Then slowly she lay down beside him. He shook his  head slowly from side to side. Rose of Sharon loosened one  side of the blanket and bared her breast. "You got to," she  said. She squirmed closer and pulled his head close. "There!"  she said. "There." Her hand moved behind his head and sup-  ported it. Her fingers moved gently in his hair. She looked  up and across the barn, and her lips came together and smiled  mysteriously.